Isaiah 9
To Us a Child Is Born

1 Nevertheless, there will be no more gloom for those who were in distress. In the past he humbled the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, but in the future he will honor Galilee of the Gentiles, by the way of the sea, along the Jordan—
2 The people walking in darkness have seen a great light;on those living in the land of the shadow of deatha light has dawned.
3 You have enlarged the nation and increased their joy;they rejoice before youas people rejoice at the harvest,as men rejoicewhen dividing the plunder.
4 For as in the day of Midian’s defeat, you have shatteredthe yoke that burdens them,the bar across their shoulders,the rod of their oppressor.
5 Every warrior’s boot used in battle and every garment rolled in bloodwill be destined for burning,will be fuel for the fire.
6 For to us a child is born, to us a son is given,and the government will be on his shoulders.And he will be calledWonderful Counselor, Mighty God,Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.
7 Of the increase of his government and peace there will be no end.He will reign on David’s throneand over his kingdom,establishing and upholding itwith justice and righteousnessfrom that time on and forever.The zeal of the Lord Almightywill accomplish this.
8 The Lord’s Anger Against Israel The Lord has sent a message against Jacob;it will fall on Israel.
9 All the people will know it— Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria—who say with prideand arrogance of heart,
10 “The bricks have fallen down, but we will rebuild with dressed stone;the fig trees have been felled,but we will replace them with cedars.”
11 But the Lord has strengthened Rezin’s foes against them and has spurred their enemies on.
12 Arameans from the east and Philistines from the west have devoured Israel with open mouth.Yet for all this, his anger is not turned away,his hand is still upraised.
13 But the people have not returned to him who struck them, nor have they sought the Lord Almighty.
14 So the Lord will cut off from Israel both head and tail, both palm branch and reed in a single day;
15 the elders and prominent men are the head, the prophets who teach lies are the tail.
16 Those who guide this people mislead them, and those who are guided are led astray.
17 Therefore the Lord will take no pleasure in the young men, nor will he pity the fatherless and widows,for everyone is ungodly and wicked,every mouth speaks vileness.Yet for all this, his anger is not turned away,his hand is still upraised.
18 Surely wickedness burns like a fire; it consumes briers and thorns,it sets the forest thickets ablaze,so that it rolls upward in a column of smoke.
19 By the wrath of the Lord Almighty the land will be scorchedand the people will be fuel for the fire;no one will spare his brother.
20 On the right they will devour, but still be hungry;on the left they will eat,but not be satisfied.Each will feed on the flesh of his own offspring:
21 Manasseh will feed on Ephraim, and Ephraim on Manasseh; together they will turn against Judah.Yet for all this, his anger is not turned away,his hand is still upraised.
