Micah 4
The Mountain of the Lord

1 In the last daysthe mountain of the Lord’s temple will be establishedas chief among the mountains;it will be raised above the hills,and peoples will stream to it.
2 Many nations will come and say, “Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,to the house of the God of Jacob.He will teach us his ways,so that we may walk in his paths.”The law will go out from Zion,the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
3 He will judge between many peoples and will settle disputes for strong nations far and wide.They will beat their swords into plowsharesand their spears into pruning hooks.Nation will not take up sword against nation,nor will they train for war anymore.
4 Every man will sit under his own vine and under his own fig tree,and no one will make them afraid,for the Lord Almighty has spoken.
5 All the nations may walk in the name of their gods;we will walk in the name of the Lordour God for ever and ever.
6 The Lord’s Plan “In that day,” declares the Lord,“I will gather the lame;I will assemble the exilesand those I have brought to grief.
7 I will make the lame a remnant, those driven away a strong nation.The Lord will rule over them in Mount Zionfrom that day and forever.
8 As for you, O watchtower of the flock, O stronghold of the Daughter of Zion,the former dominion will be restored to you;kingship will come to the Daughter of Jerusalem.”
9 Why do you now cry aloud— have you no king?Has your counselor perished,that pain seizes you like that of a woman in labor?
10 Writhe in agony, O Daughter of Zion, like a woman in labor,for now you must leave the cityto camp in the open field.You will go to Babylon;there you will be rescued.There the Lord will redeem youout of the hand of your enemies.
11 But now many nations are gathered against you.They say, “Let her be defiled,let our eyes gloat over Zion!”
12 But they do not know the thoughts of the Lord;they do not understand his plan,he who gathers them like sheaves to the threshing floor.
13 “Rise and thresh, O Daughter of Zion, for I will give you horns of iron;I will give you hoofs of bronzeand you will break to pieces many nations.”You will devote their ill-gotten gains to the Lord,their wealth to the Lord of all the earth.
